From 1999 to the present,
we have greatly diminished
the number of products
that we transfuse.
Can we do better?
Absolutely!
There are many centers
that still transfuse too much.
Our surgeons got incredibly fantastic
about doing procedures differently
—using advanced technology to do procedures
that now don’t require a blood transfusion.
All of this has benefited
the vast majority of patients
in not just the individuals of religious beliefs
who don’t want to be transfused
but also in patients who we recognize
that transfusion may not be
the right answer to their problem.
In 2008,
we were using 18,000 red cells per year,
and now we are just sneaking under 10,000;
so that’s a dramatic reduction
in the amount of blood that was transfused.
We can easily identify anemia
before the start of the surgery,
ensure that it is well treated
without blood products right from the start,
and afterward potentially go
through the surgery without transfusion.
The key to managing Witness patients
who are pregnant is planning.
It’s crucial, you know.
And you can’t really take care of any patient,
but particularly a Witness patient,
without a plan.
You know,
they have pregnancies like anyone else,
so they’re not particularly at risk.
On my birthing record, I put it in big;
and it’s on the top of the paper.
And I want people to understand
that these are the wishes of the patient
—be aware of it, be sensitive to it,
and be prepared to deal very quickly
if there is any concern of blood loss
or developing, or evolving,
postpartum hemorrhage
or hemorrhage
at any point in the delivery process.
So when blood is not an option,
obviously we have to get more creative.
If we have a Jehovah’s Witness patient
that’s coming in to deliver—
Often, we’re sent patients
that are very complex.
They may have some risk factors
for having a major postpartum hemorrhage
identified before they deliver.
We have a case conference with everybody
involved in the care of that patient,
and we come up with a strategy
—what we do before,
what we do during delivery,
and what we’re going to do after.
And it’s a multifaceted, multidisciplinary
team approach to managing those patients.
We just have everything ready to go.
We embrace the idea
that we should respectfully treat
the wishes of the Jehovah’s Witness patients.
There’s actually a bit
of controversy about whether or not
patient blood management
improves patient outcomes;
but there are some pretty large studies
from the United States in cardiac surgery,
particularly, showing that the outcomes
are at least as good and possibly better
with patient blood management.
So certainly there’s no harm
in trying to use a blood-avoidance strategy.
I have not found there to be any difference
in the outcome
of Witness patients and non-Witness patients.
There is absolutely no reason
to be afraid of surgery on a Witness patient.
My experience
is that the end results are the same.
Just the other day,
I was doing a fairly complex patient
—a complex operation
on a Jehovah’s Witness patient.
And something that
has not been really described very frequently
is where we actually cool a patient down
—we actually exsanguinate
the patient into a moving circuit
in order to see
the operative field in a very clear area.
I mean,
that’s a pretty massive shifting of volume,
and we were able to do it
in a bloodless manner in terms of transfusion.
So I think we embrace the fact
that there are
many complex cases that we can do.
I’ve only had positive experiences;
I haven’t had negative experiences.
I think the biggest part is communication.